Downstream Architecture

From the ingestion core to alerts -- ML layer and beyond

Smart India Hackathon · companion to the layered build plan · v1

1. Where the codebase stands

The ingestion core is well built. Rust with PyO3 for the hot path is the right call for a project that has to report a
throughput number. Reading Zeek fields by name from the #fields header rather than by column index is a professional
touch that will keep the parsers working across Zeek versions. The module separation is clean, tests exist, and the
documentation is better than most production repositories.

Four defects need fixing before any model is trained on this output. Three of them corrupt features silently, which is the
worst failure mode: nothing crashes, the numbers look plausible, and the models learn from noise.

1.1 Window features are misaligned with their flows

sliding_window_features copies the input, sorts it by timestamp, and returns results in sorted order.
extract_flow_features returns results in input order. In pipeline.py , the two are merged by index:

vec = dict(flow_feats[i])    # different ordering
vec.update(window_feats[i])

These only agree when conn.log is already sorted by ts . Zeek writes a connection record when the connection closes,
but the ts field is when it opened. Any long-lived connection therefore appears later in the file than short connections
that started after it. On real traffic the file is not sorted, and every window feature is attached to the wrong flow.

   FIX

   Have the window extractor return the flow's identifier alongside its features and join on that, or sort once in pipeline.py
   before either call and keep a single canonical ordering. Add a regression test using deliberately out-of-order records -- the
   current test data is already sorted, which is why this has not surfaced.

1.2 The sliding window is global, not keyed
This is the most consequential issue. SlidingWindow holds every flow in the last N seconds regardless of who sent it. So:

     unique_dst_ports is the number of distinct ports contacted by the entire network, not by one host. On a busy link this
     sits in the hundreds permanently and carries no scanning signal.
     src_ip_entropy is computed across the whole window rather than across the sources hitting one destination.
     Spoofed-flood detection needs the latter.
     inter_arrival_mean and inter_arrival_stddev measure the gaps between all flows on the wire, not between repeated
     connections in one conversation. Beacon periodicity is invisible at this granularity.

The README correctly states what these features should indicate. The implementation cannot deliver it, because the
aggregation key is missing.

   FIX

   Replace the single window with a map from entity key to its own window. Three key families are needed: source IP (scanning,
   flooding), destination IP (source entropy, SYN ratios), and the (src, dst, dport) tuple (beaconing). The SlidingWindow
   struct itself is correct and incremental -- it just needs to be instantiated per key rather than once globally.

1.3 The first flow in every window gets an absurd rate
flow_rate is computed as n / (span + 1e-6) . When a window holds one flow, span is zero and the rate becomes one
million. This is visible in the committed features.jsonl , where the first row carries flow_rate: 1000000.0 .

Any gradient-boosted model handed this will discover that "flow_rate equals exactly 1e6" perfectly identifies window
boundaries and will learn that instead of learning anything about traffic.

   FIX

   Divide by the configured window size, not by the observed span, and return zero or a null when fewer than two flows are
   present. Rate over an unknown span is not a rate.
1.4 The uid join is silently discarded

join_by_uid carefully attaches dns_query , ja3_hash , ssl_server_name and friends onto each connection record. That
enriched JSON is then passed to extract_flow_features , which deserializes it into FlowRecord -- a struct with none of
those fields. Serde drops unknown fields without complaint, so the enrichment evaporates. The DNS, TLS and HTTP
blocks in the output actually come from the separate parsed arrays further down the function.

Nothing is broken today, but it is dead work that reads as if it does something, and it will mislead whoever extends the
pipeline next.

1.5 Feature-quality gaps worth closing now

Feature          Problem
cipher_encoded
                 cipher.len() % 16 + 1 . This is the length of a string, encoded modulo sixteen. It carries no
has_ja3          information about the cipher suite. The README flags it as a placeholder; treat it as a bug rather than a
rcode            feature.
DNS aggregation
Packet timing    A boolean saying a fingerprint exists is almost useless -- nearly every TLS connection has one. The signal
                 is the fingerprint value and how rare it is against a learned baseline. Keep the hash string.

                 Parsed into DnsRecord and never used. NXDOMAIN burst rate per host is often a stronger DGA
                 indicator than the entropy of the domain string itself.

                 All DNS features are per-query. Tunnelling is detected per parent domain: subdomain cardinality,
                 sustained query rate, record-type mix. That aggregation does not exist yet.

                 conn.log gives totals, not sequences. Packet-size and inter-packet-timing sequences for encrypted-
                 session detection need a Zeek script that emits them, or they must be dropped from scope honestly.
2. The structural change: batch to streaming

The pipeline currently reads whole log files, holds all records in memory, serialises the entire array to JSON, crosses
into Rust, and writes an output file. That is precisely the end-of-run report the problem statement rules out in
requirement (c).

The good news is that the expensive parts are already correct. SlidingWindow is genuinely incremental. The parsers are
per-line. What has to change is the driver, not the mathematics.

2.1 Keep both paths, share the code

Do not throw the batch path away. Build the streaming path beside it, and make both call the same Rust feature
functions.

Path               Used for
Offline
                   Training-set generation, evaluation, replay experiments. Reads a whole capture, emits labelled feature vectors.
Online             This is roughly what exists now.

                   Live detection. Tails Zeek logs, updates keyed windows incrementally, scores continuously, emits alerts with
                   bounded latency.

TRAIN/SERVE SKEW IS THE CLASSIC WAY THIS PROJECT FAILS

If training features come from one code path and serving features come from another, the model sees different distributions
in production than it saw in training, and accuracy collapses for reasons nobody can debug at 2 a.m. The single most valuable
property of your current design is that the feature mathematics lives in one Rust crate. Protect that. Neither path should ever
compute a feature the other cannot.

2.2 Move the FFI boundary

Today, every record crosses the Rust-Python boundary as JSON: serialise, copy, deserialise, and again on the way back.
For a file this is fine. At sustained line rate this becomes the bottleneck, and it defeats the reason for writing the core in
Rust at all.

For the streaming path, invert the ownership. Rust holds the window state and never hands it out. Python receives only
what it must score, in batches. Concretely:

Rust owns:    log tailing, parsing, keyed windows, baselines,
              rule detectors, candidate gating
Python owns:  ML inference, calibration, correlation, API, dashboard
Boundary:     a batch of gated candidates going out,
              a batch of scores coming back

This is a small number of crossings per second rather than one per flow.

3. Entity feature views

This is the central architectural idea for everything downstream, and it is what the current single flat vector cannot
express.

Your six threat classes do not observe the same thing. They observe different entities over different time horizons:

Entity             Horizon           Serves
flow               instant           TLS session scoring, per-connection anomalies
source IP          5s / 60s / 5min   port scanning, flood origination
destination IP     5s / 60s          source-entropy flood detection, amplification
(src, dst, dport)  30min - 6h        beacon periodicity
DNS parent domain  5min / 1h         tunnelling, subdomain fan-out
internal host      rolling baseline  exfiltration, JA3 rarity, destination novelty

A feature vector attached to a flow cannot answer "how many distinct ports has this source touched in the last minute"
without the source-keyed view existing. Build these six views as first-class objects in the Rust core. Each detector
subscribes to exactly the views it needs. Nothing computes features it does not use.

The flow-level vector you already emit remains valuable -- it becomes the flow view, one of six.

3.1 Memory discipline
The current implementation uses HashSet for distinct counts. Under a spoofed flood, the source-keyed map grows one
entry per forged address and the process dies. Since demonstrating throughput under attack conditions is a graded
requirement, this will surface at exactly the wrong moment.

     HyperLogLog for distinct counts -- fixed memory, roughly 2% error, more than adequate for "is this host touching
     many ports".
     Count-Min Sketch for heavy hitters -- top talkers without storing every key.
     A bounded key map with time-based eviction and a hard entry ceiling. When full, evict oldest rather than allocating.
     Streaming entropy over a fixed-size counter table rather than an exact multiset.

This is worth a slide in the presentation. It is the difference between a prototype and something that survives a flood.
4. Detection layer

4.1 Gate before you infer

Do not run models on every flow. Rules run on everything in Rust at line rate and cost microseconds. Models run only
on candidates that pass a cheap gate.

every    flow
     ->
     ->  rule detectors in Rust     (all flows, always)
     ->
     ->  gate: is this DNS?         -> DGA / tunnel models
     ->
         gate: does this have TLS?  -> encrypted-session model

         gate: outbound + above baseline -> exfiltration model

         gate: repeated tuple seen 5+ times -> beacon analysis

Typical captures gate out well over ninety percent of flows before any model is touched. Your throughput figure ends up
governed by Rust, not by Python inference, which is the whole point of the language split.

4.2 What is a rule and what is a model

Detector                         Type               Rationale
Port scanning                    Rule, Rust         Distinct-destination counting over a keyed window. A model adds nothing and
                                                    removes explainability.
Volumetric flood                 Rule, Rust         Rate against source entropy at the destination. Two thresholds, fully interpretable.
Amplification                    Rule, Rust         Response-to-request byte ratio on UDP toward reflector ports.
DNS tunnelling                   Rule, Rust         Per-domain cardinality and query-length statistics.
Beaconing                        Statistical, Rust  Signal processing on an inter-arrival series. Not a learning problem.
DGA                              Model, Python      String classification. Genuinely benefits from learning.
Encrypted session                Model, Python      Multi-feature interaction over metadata. Genuinely benefits.
Exfiltration                     Anomaly, Python    Deviation from a learned per-host baseline.

SAY THIS OUT LOUD IN THE PRESENTATION

"We used a statistical test rather than a neural network here because it outperformed the model we tried, runs in
microseconds, and can explain every alert." That is a strong answer. Bolting deep learning onto a counting problem is a weak
one, and evaluators in this domain will know the difference.

5. The ML detectors in detail

MODEL 1

DGA classification

Why the current features are not enough
Query entropy, length and label count will reach perhaps eighty percent on classic random-character families and then
stop. They fail completely on dictionary-based generators, which assemble domains from real English words. Those
score lower entropy than many legitimate content-delivery hostnames, so an entropy threshold has the sign backwards
for that whole family.

Input representation
Feed the model the domain string itself, not a scalar summary of it. Two options, both viable:

     Gradient boosting over character n-grams. TF-IDF over character bigrams and trigrams, concatenated with the
     scalar features you already compute. Trains in seconds, runs in microseconds, and is straightforward to explain.
     Character-level convolutional network. Embed characters, apply small convolutions, pool, classify. Stronger on
     dictionary families. Heavier to train and to justify.
Start with the first. Only reach for the second if evaluation shows a specific family it cannot handle.

Add the behavioural signal
The strongest DGA indicator is often not the string at all. Infected hosts generate hundreds of candidate domains and
most do not resolve. A burst of NXDOMAIN responses from a single host inside a short window is a powerful, cheap,
per-host feature -- and you already parse rcode without using it.

Combine both: string score from the model, NXDOMAIN burst rate from the host view, fused into one finding. String
evidence alone produces false positives on content-delivery hostnames; the behavioural signal disambiguates them.

Training data
Legitimate domains from a large public ranking list; generated domains from published algorithm implementations
across multiple families. Split by family, not randomly -- hold out entire families from training so your reported score
reflects generalisation to unseen generators rather than memorisation of the ones you trained on. This distinction is
worth stating explicitly in the documentation; it is what separates a real evaluation from a flattering one.

MODEL 2

Encrypted-session classification

The feature that matters most
Replace has_ja3 with the fingerprint value and a rarity score. During the learning phase, accumulate a frequency table
of every JA3 hash observed. At detection time, the feature is how unusual this client's fingerprint is relative to that
baseline, and whether this specific host has ever presented it before.

This works because a browser, a scripting-language HTTP library, and a command-line tool each offer different cipher
suites in a different order, producing distinct fingerprints. A host that has presented a browser fingerprint for a week
and suddenly presents a scripting-library fingerprint to an unfamiliar destination is the signal. No payload is involved at
any point.

Full feature set

Feature                           Source

JA3 global rarity                 frequency table from baseline
JA3 novelty for this host         host view
JA3S rarity                       frequency table
SNI present / absent              ssl.log
SNI entropy and length            computed
Certificate validity window       x509.log -- not yet parsed
Self-signed indicator             x509.log -- not yet parsed

TLS version                       already encoded
Mean packet size each direction   bytes divided by packets
Duration, byte ratio              flow view

Two of these require an x509.log parser, which does not exist yet. It follows the same pattern as the four you have
written and is perhaps an hour of work for meaningful signal.

   BE HONEST ABOUT THE SEQUENCE FEATURES

   The literature on this problem leans heavily on packet-size and inter-arrival sequences. conn.log gives totals, not sequences,
   so mean packet size is a weak proxy. Either add a Zeek script that emits per-packet sizes for the first several packets of each
   TLS connection, or state plainly in the documentation that sequence modelling is out of scope for this prototype and explain
   why. Both are defensible. Claiming sequence analysis you have not implemented is not.

MODEL 3

Exfiltration anomaly detection

Why supervised learning is the wrong tool here
You cannot enumerate what exfiltration looks like -- it looks like whatever a large upload looks like. What you can
characterise is what this host normally does. So the model is unsupervised, scoring deviation from a per-host baseline.
Baseline contents, per internal host
     Distribution of outbound bytes per hour, kept as robust statistics rather than mean and standard deviation, since a
     single backup would otherwise poison the baseline permanently.
     Set of previously contacted destinations, so novelty is measurable.
     Typical active hours.
     Typical outbound-to-inbound ratio.

Scoring
Robust z-score on outbound volume, plus destination novelty, plus time-of-day deviation, combined either by a small
isolation forest or by a weighted sum you tuned on validation data. Prefer the simpler option unless it demonstrably
underperforms.

   THIS DETECTOR WILL PRODUCE YOUR WORST FALSE-POSITIVE RATE

   Cloud backup, video calls, and large uploads all look exactly like exfiltration on a volume anomaly. Tune this one for precision
   over recall and say so explicitly. A detector that catches sixty percent of exfiltration with two false alarms per day is
   operationally useful; one that catches ninety percent with two hundred false alarms per day gets switched off in week one.
   State that trade-off before a judge asks about it.

MODEL 4

Beacon periodicity
Not a learned model, but it belongs here because it operates on a series rather than a record.

For each (src, dst, dport) tuple with at least a handful of observations, take the connection timestamps and compute
the inter-arrival series. Then:

     Coefficient of variation -- standard deviation over mean. Near zero means near-perfect regularity.
     Autocorrelation at the dominant lag -- catches beacons whose jitter defeats a simple variance test.
     Spectral peak strength -- a strong single frequency in the arrival series.
     Payload-size consistency -- automated check-ins transfer near-identical byte counts each time. Humans do not.

Combine into one score. Then sweep the jitter parameter on your own emulator and report the breaking point: "holds to
forty percent jitter, degrades beyond". That single sentence is worth more than any accuracy figure, because it shows
you characterised your detector rather than merely ran it.

The confounders
Time synchronisation, package update checks and monitoring heartbeats are all perfectly periodic and entirely
innocent. If your benign traffic contains none of them, this detector will report zero false positives and that number will
be meaningless. Plant them deliberately, then report precision against them. That is the credible version of this result.
6. Training and evaluation infrastructure

6.1 The training pipeline

labelled pcap + scenario manifest

-> Zeek

-> Rust parsers            [same code  as online]
                                       as online]
-> entity feature views [same code
                                       + metrics
-> label join on manifest

-> per-detector training set

-> train, cross-validate, calibrate

-> model artefact + calibration curve

-> registry

Every model artefact ships with the feature schema version it was trained against. On load, the serving side checks that
version against what the feature store produces and refuses to start on a mismatch. This single check prevents the most
common and most confusing production failure in ML systems.

6.2 Calibration

Raw model outputs are not probabilities, and a rule's boolean is not comparable to a gradient-boosted score. The
problem statement requires a confidence value; that value must mean the same thing regardless of which detector
produced it.

Fit an isotonic or Platt calibration per detector on held-out data, and store the calibration curve with the model. After
calibration, a stated confidence of 0.8 should correspond to roughly eighty percent of such alerts being genuine. Show
the reliability diagram in your documentation -- almost no competing team will have one, and it is direct evidence that
your confidence scores are real rather than decorative.

6.3 Evaluation

Report per threat class: precision, recall, F1, and false positives per hour on purely benign traffic. Do not report overall
accuracy; with rare positives it is dominated by the negative class and a detector that fires on nothing scores extremely
well. Anyone familiar with the domain will notice immediately.

Also report the operating point you chose and why. A precision-recall curve with a marked threshold and one sentence
of justification demonstrates engineering judgement in a way a single number cannot.

7. Fusion layer

Eight detectors emitting findings independently produce an unusable alert stream. Four stages sit between findings and
alerts.

Calibrate
Apply the stored curve. Raw score becomes comparable confidence.

Assign severity
Severity is not confidence. Combine confidence with the inherent seriousness of the threat class and, if modelled, the
importance of the asset. A moderate-confidence exfiltration finding on a critical server outranks a high-confidence scan
against a spare machine.

Deduplicate
Suppress repeats for the same entity, class and evidence pattern inside a time window. Emit one alert carrying an
occurrence count and a first-seen timestamp, not sixty identical rows.

Correlate
Group alerts sharing a host inside a window into an incident, ordered along the kill chain: reconnaissance, then
command and control, then exfiltration. An incident scores higher than the sum of its parts, because the sequence is
itself evidence.

This layer is the highest value per line of code in the entire project, and it is the one most competing teams will not
build at all.

8. Serving, storage and interface
8.1 Model serving
Models load once at startup into a scoring service that accepts batches. Every response carries the model version,
which is stamped onto the alert. Two properties matter: the service must never block the rule path, and a model failure
must degrade to rules-only rather than halting detection. Log the degradation, keep detecting.

8.2 Alert fan-out
Each alert goes to two independent consumers in parallel -- a WebSocket channel for the live dashboard, and a batched
writer for PostgreSQL. The live path never waits on the durable path. Routing alerts through the database before
display converts your streaming system into a micro-batch system and forfeits requirement (c).

Stamp two timestamps on every alert: the triggering packet's time and the emission time. The difference is your
detection latency, which you are required to report.

8.3 Storage
An alerts table with evidence as JSONB, an incidents table, and a join between them. Index on timestamp, source IP
and threat class -- those three cover essentially every query the dashboard and the analyst layer will issue. Batch the
inserts; one write per alert becomes the bottleneck during a flood, which is exactly when you least want one.

8.4 Dashboard
Six panels, in descending order of how much they matter on demo day:

1. Live alert feed over WebSocket, filterable by class, severity and host.
2. Evidence drill-down -- click any alert, see the exact features, their values, and the thresholds they crossed. This

     directly answers the supporting-evidence requirement and is the single most convincing thing on the screen.
3. Incident view showing correlated activity on one host as an ordered narrative.
4. Throughput panel: live flows per second, packets per second, megabits per second.
5. Latency panel: distribution of packet-to-alert delay with median and tail marked.
6. Host timeline, which is how an analyst actually investigates.

8.5 The RAG analyst layer
Strictly downstream, strictly read-only against the alert store. It explains an alert in plain language from its evidence
fields, narrates a correlated incident, and answers natural-language questions over persisted alerts.

Hard boundaries: it never influences detection, never modifies a score, and is never on the critical path for emitting an
alert. Every statement it produces must trace back to a specific stored evidence field. The system must pass every
requirement in the problem statement with this layer switched off -- be ready to demonstrate that.

   PREPARE FOR THE NETWORK-ACCESS QUESTION

   A judge will ask whether the language model has network access and whether that breaks the read-only constraint. Calling a
   hosted API is egress from the monitoring enclave -- defensible, but it invites argument you do not need. A locally hosted
   model removes the question entirely and makes for a cleaner demo. If you use a hosted API, document the boundary explicitly
   and show that the ingest path remains one-directional regardless.
9. Immediate work queue

#   Task                                       Why it is ordered here

1   Fix the window/flow ordering misalignment  Every window feature is currently attached to the wrong flow on
                                               unsorted logs. Nothing downstream is trustworthy until this is
                                               corrected.

2   Fix flow_rate division                     The 1e6 artefact will be learned by any model trained on current
                                               output.

3   Key the sliding windows by entity          Scanning, flooding and beaconing detection are all impossible
                                               without this. It is the largest single change and it blocks four
                                               detectors.

4   Build the six entity views                 The interface every detector reads from. Freeze it early.

5   Bound the memory with sketches             Do this while the views are being written, not as a later
                                               optimisation. Retrofitting is painful.

6   Streaming driver beside the batch driver   Both call the same feature code. Requirement (c) depends on this
                                               existing.

7   Rule detectors in Rust                     Four of eight detectors, all cheap, all explainable. Fastest path to
                                               visible results.

8   x509.log parser; keep JA3 values and build the rarity table Unblocks the encrypted-session model.

9   Per-domain DNS aggregation; wire up rcode  Unblocks tunnelling detection and materially improves DGA.

10  Train DGA and encrypted-session models     Only now, once the features they need actually exist.

11  Calibration and fusion                     Turns eight detectors into one coherent system.

12  Alert bus, storage, dashboard              Can be built against fixtures in parallel with everything above.

What to do first

Items one and two are each a few lines and can be done today. Item three is the substantial one -- a day or two of
careful work, and it unblocks more of the project than anything else on the list. Do not start training models until item
nine lands, because models trained on the current feature set would have to be retrained from scratch afterwards.

   WORTH SAYING PLAINLY

   The foundation here is better than most teams will have at this stage. Header-aware parsing, a Rust hot path, real tests and
   honest documentation are not common in hackathon repositories. The defects above are ordinary consequences of building
   the batch version first -- which was the right order to build in. Fix the four, key the windows, and the rest of the system has a
   solid base to sit on.
