--- page 1 ---
Layered	Build	Plan
AI-based	detection	of	cyber	threats	in	unidirectional	IP	traffic
Smart	India	Hackathon	·	prototype	engineering	plan	·	v1
1.	Architecture	review
The	proposed	architecture	is	sound.	The	spine	—	capture,	parse	with	Zeek,	extract	features,	run	a	three-branch
detection	engine,	emit	scored	alerts,	persist	and	display	—	is	the	right	decomposition,	and	it	maps	cleanly	onto	every
functional	requirement	in	the	problem	statement.	Choosing	Zeek	instead	of	hand-rolling	packet	parsing	is	the	single
best	decision	on	the	diagram;	it	removes	weeks	of	work	and	it	is	what	real	monitoring	enclaves	actually	run.
Five	things	need	to	change	before	construction	starts.	None	of	them	are	structural	rewrites;	all	of	them	are	cheaper	to
fix	now	than	in	week	four.
1.1		Add	a	flow-record	ingest	path
The	problem	statement	names	NetFlow,	IPFIX	and	sFlow	explicitly	as	expected	inputs.	The	current	diagram	shows	only
PCAP.	A	grader	checking	requirements	against	your	architecture	will	mark	this	as	a	gap.
The	fix	is	small:	a	second	ingest	adapter	that	consumes	exported	flow	records	and	normalises	them	into	the	same
internal	record	shape	that	Zeek	output	produces.	Flow	records	carry	no	payload	—	only	the	five-tuple,	byte	and	packet
counts,	and	timestamps	—	so	the	DNS,	TLS	and	packet-timing	detectors	cannot	run	on	that	path.	State	this	limitation
explicitly	in	your	documentation.	Knowing	the	boundaries	of	your	own	data	reads	as	competence,	not	weakness.
1.2		Alerts	must	not	travel	through	the	database	to	reach	the	screen
The	diagram	shows	a	straight	line	from	the	alert	stage	into	FastAPI	and	PostgreSQL,	and	from	there	into	the	dashboard.
Read	literally,	that	means	an	alert	is	written	to	Postgres	and	then	read	back	out	before	anyone	sees	it.	That	is	a	batch
pattern	wearing	streaming	clothes,	and	it	directly	contradicts	requirement	(c),	which	demands	incremental	processing
with	bounded	latency.
Split	the	path.	When	an	alert	is	produced,	it	fans	out	to	two	consumers	in	parallel:	a	WebSocket	channel	that	pushes	it
to	the	dashboard	immediately,	and	a	writer	that	persists	it	to	PostgreSQL	for	history,	search	and	evaluation.	The	live
path	never	waits	on	the	durable	path.	This	is	a	ten-line	change	now	and	an	awkward	retrofit	later.
1.3		Feature	extraction	is	not	one	box
The	hardest	engineering	in	this	entire	system	is	hiding	inside	the	words	"feature	extraction".	Turning	one	Zeek	log	line
into	a	few	numeric	fields	is	trivial.	What	the	detectors	actually	need	is	
stateful	windowed	aggregation
	at	several
granularities	at	once:
Per	source	IP	over	short	windows	—	feeds	the	flood	and	scan	detectors
Per	source-destination-port	tuple	over	long	windows	—	feeds	beacon	detection
Per	internal	host,	as	a	slowly-updating	baseline	—	feeds	exfiltration	and	fingerprint-rarity	scoring
Per	parent	domain	—	feeds	DNS	tunnelling
All	of	that	has	to	run	in	bounded	memory	while	traffic	streams	through.	Give	it	its	own	named	layer	with	its	own	owner.
Teams	that	treat	it	as	a	helper	function	discover	in	week	three	that	it	is	actually	the	project.
1.4		Insert	a	fusion	layer	between	detection	and	alerting
Three	detection	branches	producing	raw	scores	cannot	emit	alerts	directly.	Three	problems	appear	immediately:
A	rule	outputs	a	boolean,	a	classifier	outputs	a	probability,	an	anomaly	detector	outputs	an	unbounded	distance.
These	are	not	comparable,	and	the	problem	statement	requires	a	confidence	score	that	means	something.
A	beacon	that	fires	every	sixty	seconds	for	an	hour	generates	sixty	identical	alerts.	That	is	an	unusable	dashboard.
A	host	that	beacons,	then	opens	an	unusual	encrypted	session,	then	uploads	a	large	volume,	is	one	incident.	Emitting
it	as	three	unrelated	alerts	throws	away	the	most	valuable	signal	you	have.
The	fusion	layer	calibrates	scores	onto	a	common	scale,	suppresses	duplicates	within	a	time	window,	and	correlates
related	alerts	into	incidents.	This	is	the	layer	that	separates	a	working	prototype	from	a	pile	of	scripts,	and	almost	no
competing	team	will	build	it.
--- page 2 ---
1.5		Scope	the	AI	analyst	layer	deliberately
The	RAG	analyst	at	the	bottom	of	the	diagram	is	a	real	differentiator,	and	it	plays	to	the	team's	existing	strengths.	It	is
also	the	layer	most	likely	to	consume	time	that	the	six	detectors	needed.
Keep	it	strictly	downstream	and	strictly	read-only	against	the	alert	store.	It	should	explain	an	alert	in	plain	language,
narrate	a	correlated	incident,	and	answer	questions	like	"what	happened	on	this	host	in	the	last	hour"	by	querying
persisted	alerts.	It	should	never	influence	detection,	never	change	a	score,	and	never	be	on	the	critical	path	for
producing	an	alert.	If	the	analyst	breaks	or	is	switched	off,	the	system	must	still	fully	satisfy	the	problem	statement.
ANTICIPATE	THIS	QUESTION
A	judge	will	ask	whether	the	LLM	has	network	access,	and	whether	that	violates	the	read-only	constraint.	Have	the	answer
ready.	Calling	a	hosted	model	API	is	egress	from	the	monitoring	enclave,	which	is	defensible	but	invites	argument.	Running	a
local	model	removes	the	question	entirely	and	is	the	stronger	demo.	If	you	must	use	a	hosted	API,	document	the	boundary
explicitly	and	show	that	the	ingest	path	remains	one-way	regardless.
1.6		Corrected	architecture
PCAP	/	replay									NetFlow	/	IPFIX	/	sFlow
						↓																								↓
			Zeek															flow	adapter
						↓																								↓
								normalised	flow	records
																↓
										feature	store
								(windows	+	b aselines)
																↓
								detection	engine
					rules		|		ML		|		anomaly
																↓
										fusion	layer
		calib rate	·	dedupe	·	correlate
																↓
											alert	b us
						↙																		↘
Web Socket												PostgreSQL
			↓																									↓
dashb oard										AI	analyst	(RAG)
Everything	below	builds	this,	bottom-up,	one	layer	at	a	time.
--- page 3 ---
2.	Layer-by-layer	build
Each	layer	below	states	its	purpose,	what	to	build,	the	decisions	to	make	once	and	not	revisit,	and	a	concrete
completion	test.	Build	them	in	order.	Do	not	start	a	layer	until	the	one	below	it	passes	its	test.
LAYER	0
Contracts	and	scaffolding
Purpose
Unblock	parallel	work.	Until	the	data	shapes	are	fixed,	every	person	on	the	team	is	waiting	on	someone	else.	This	is	the
highest-leverage	two	hours	of	the	entire	project.
What	to	build
Two	frozen	JSON	schemas,	a	repository	skeleton,	and	a	fixture	file	of	synthetic	records	that	conform	to	them.
The	flow	record
	—	what	leaves	the	parsing	layer	and	enters	the	feature	store:
{
		"ts":	1735689600.123,
		"uid":	"CHhAvVGS1DHFjwGM9",
		"src_ip":	"10.0.0.15",			"src_port":	51422,
		"dst_ip":	"93.184.216.34",	"dst_port":	443,
		"proto":	"tcp",
		"duration":	2.41,
		"orig_b ytes":	1204,	"resp_b ytes":	88213,
		"orig_pkts":	14,			"resp_pkts":	62,
		"conn_state":	"SF",
		"dns":		{	"query":	"...",	"qtype":	"A",	"rcode":	"NOERROR"	},
		"tls":		{	"sni":	"...",	"ja3":	"...",	"ja3s":	"...",	"version":	"TLSv13"	}
}
The	
dns
	and	
tls
	objects	are	present	only	when	the	protocol	applies,	and	never	present	on	the	flow-record	ingest	path.
The	alert	record
	—	the	system's	actual	output,	and	the	thing	the	problem	statement	grades:
{
		"alert_id":	"a7f3...",
		"ts":	1735689612.880,
		"flow_id":	"CHhAvVGS1DHFjwGM9",
		"src_ip":	"10.0.0.15",	"dst_ip":	"93.184.216.34",
		"threat_class":	"c2_b eaconing",
		"confidence":	0.87,
		"severity":	"high",
		"detector":	"b eacon_periodicity",
		"detector_version":	"0.3.1",
		"evidence":	[
				{	"feature":	"interval_cv",						"value":	0.04,	"threshold":	0.15	},
				{	"feature":	"ob served_periods",	"value":	42	},
				{	"feature":	"mean_interval_s",		"value":	60.2	}
		],
		"mitre_technique":	"T1071.001",
		"incident_id":	"i2c9..."
}
Decisions	to	freeze	now
Field	names	and	types	in	both	schemas.	Changing	these	in	week	three	costs	a	day	of	everyone's	time.
The	threat	class	identifiers,	as	fixed	strings.	Note	that	the	six	classes	in	the	problem	statement	map	to	eight
detectors,	since	volumetric	flooding	and	amplification	behave	differently,	as	do	DGA	and	DNS	tunnelling.
Severity	vocabulary:	
low
,	
medium
,	
high
,	
critical
.
Time	is	always	a	Unix	float	in	UTC.	No	local	time	anywhere,	ever.
Every	alert	carries	evidence.	A	detector	that	cannot	say	
why
	it	fired	does	not	ship.
DONE	WHEN
Both	schemas	are	committed	with	a	validator.	A	fixture	file	of	a	few	hundred	synthetic	flow	records	and	a	few	dozen	synthetic
alerts	exists	in	the	repository.	The	dashboard	developer	can	build	a	full	UI	against	those	fixtures	without	any	other	layer
existing.
LAYER	1
Ingest
--- page 4 ---
Purpose
Get	traffic	into	the	system	at	a	controllable,	repeatable	rate,	from	both	input	types	the	problem	statement	names.
What	to	build
Packet	path.
	A	replay	harness	that	pushes	a	capture	file	onto	a	network	interface	at	a	configurable	rate,	plus	a	live-
capture	mode	reading	directly	from	an	interface.	Rate	control	is	not	optional	—	it	is	the	mechanism	by	which	you	will
later	demonstrate	your	throughput	figure.	Build	the	speed	multiplier	and	the	packets-per-second	cap	on	day	one.
Flow	path.
	A	collector	that	receives	exported	flow	records	over	UDP	and	an	adapter	that	normalises	them	into	the
Layer	0	flow	record	shape,	leaving	the	protocol-specific	objects	absent.
Decisions	to	freeze	now
Run	the	whole	lab	on	Linux,	in	containers,	on	the	always-on	machine.	Packet	capture,	raw	sockets	and	most	traffic
generators	are	Linux-native	and	fight	you	elsewhere.
The	container	bridge	interface	is	your	span	port.	Everything	is	captured	there.
Replay	is	always	deterministic	and	repeatable.	The	same	input	file	must	produce	the	same	alerts.	Without	this	you
cannot	debug	anything.
DONE	WHEN
You	can	replay	a	capture	file	at	1x,	5x	and	20x,	and	observe	packet	counts	on	the	capture	interface	that	match	expectations.
A	flow	record	sent	to	the	collector	appears	as	a	normalised	record	on	the	other	side.
LAYER	2
Parsing
Purpose
Turn	packets	into	structured,	protocol-aware	conversation	records.
What	to	build
Zeek,	configured	to	write	its	logs	as	newline-delimited	JSON,	with	the	JA3	fingerprinting	plugin	enabled.	Then	a	thin
reader	that	tails	the	log	files	and	emits	Layer	0	flow	records.
The	logs	that	matter:
Log
Feeds
conn.log
Every	detector.	Flow	tuple,	byte	counts	per	direction,	duration,	connection	state.
dns.log
DGA	and	DNS	tunnelling.	Query	name,	record	type,	response	code.
ssl.log
Encrypted-session	detection.	TLS	version,	SNI,	JA3,	JA3S.
x509.log
Certificate	features:	validity	window,	self-signed	status.
Decisions	to	freeze	now
Do	not	write	your	own	packet	parser.	This	is	not	a	shortcut	worth	taking,	and	Zeek	is	more	defensible	in	front	of
judges	than	anything	you	could	write	in	six	weeks.
Join	
conn.log
	to	the	protocol	logs	on	Zeek's	connection	UID,	not	on	the	five-tuple.	The	UID	is	exactly	what	it	exists
for.
Late-arriving	protocol	data	is	normal.	A	DNS	or	TLS	record	may	land	after	the	connection	record.	Handle	it,	do	not
fight	it.
DONE	WHEN
Replaying	a	capture	produces	Layer	0	flow	records	with	DNS	and	TLS	fields	correctly	populated,	validated	against	the	Layer
0	schema.	JA3	hashes	are	present	on	TLS	connections.
LAYER	3
Feature	store
Purpose
Maintain	the	rolling	state	that	every	detector	reads	from.	This	is	the	technical	heart	of	the	system.
--- page 5 ---
What	to	build
A	stateful	aggregator	keeping	several	window	families	in	memory	simultaneously:
Key
Window
What	it	accumulates
source	IP
5s,	60s,	5min
packet	and	byte	rate,	distinct	destination	IPs,	distinct	destination	ports,
connection-state	distribution
destination	IP
5s,	60s
distinct	sources,	source-IP	entropy,	SYN	to	SYN-ACK	ratio
src,	dst,	dport
30min	–	6h
connection	timestamps,	inter-arrival	series,	byte-size	consistency
parent	domain
5min,	1h
distinct	subdomains,	mean	query	length,	record-type	mix,	NXDOMAIN
rate
internal	host
rolling	baseline
typical	outbound	volume,	known	destinations,	seen	JA3	fingerprints,
active	hours
Decisions	to	freeze	now
Bound	the	memory.
	A	naive	set	of	destination	ports	per	source	IP	dies	the	moment	a	spoofed	flood	arrives.	Use
probabilistic	structures:	HyperLogLog	for	distinct	counts,	Count-Min	Sketch	for	heavy	hitters,	a	streaming	estimator
for	entropy.	This	is	a	genuine	engineering	differentiator	and	worth	a	slide.
Expire	state	on	a	timer,	not	on	memory	pressure.	Predictable	eviction	beats	clever	eviction.
The	store	exposes	one	read	interface.	Detectors	never	touch	raw	logs.
Two	operating	modes:	
learning
,	which	updates	baselines	and	emits	nothing,	and	
detection
,	which	reads	baselines
and	scores.	The	mode	switch	is	explicit	and	visible.
DONE	WHEN
Replaying	a	capture	produces	correct	window	aggregates	that	you	have	verified	by	hand	against	a	small	sample.	Memory
usage	stays	flat	across	a	long	replay	containing	a	high-cardinality	flood.
LAYER	4
Detection	engine
Purpose
Read	features,	produce	scored	findings.	Three	branches,	one	plug-in	interface.
The	interface
Every	detector,	regardless	of	branch,	implements	the	same	contract:	it	receives	a	feature	view,	and	returns	either
nothing	or	a	finding	carrying	a	raw	score	and	the	evidence	features	that	produced	it.	Nothing	else.	Detectors	do	not
write	to	the	database,	do	not	talk	to	each	other,	and	do	not	decide	severity.
Branch	A	—	rules	and	statistics
Build	these	first.	Half	of	the	eight	detectors	need	no	machine	learning	at	all,	they	run	in	microseconds,	and	they	are
trivially	explainable	when	a	judge	asks	why	an	alert	fired.
Detector
Core	signal
Port	scanning
Distinct	destination	ports	or	hosts	per	source	per	window;	ratio	of	attempts	to	established
connections.	Separate	vertical,	horizontal	and	block	patterns.
Volumetric	DDoS
Source-IP	entropy	against	packet	rate.	High	entropy	with	no	completed	handshakes	indicates
spoofing;	low	entropy	with	high	volume	indicates	a	direct	flood.
Amplification
Response-to-request	byte	ratio	on	UDP	toward	known	reflector	ports.
DNS	tunnelling
Subdomain	cardinality	under	one	parent,	mean	query	length,	unusual	record-type	mix,	sustained
query	rate	to	one	authority.
Branch	B	—	machine	learning
Two	of	the	eight	genuinely	benefit	from	a	trained	model.	Spend	your	modelling	effort	here	and	nowhere	else.
--- page 6 ---
Detector
Approach
DGA	classification
Character-level	model	over	the	queried	label:	entropy,	n-gram	frequency	against	a	legitimate-
domain	corpus,	length,	digit	ratio,	consonant	runs.	Combine	with	the	behavioural	signal	of
NXDOMAIN	bursts	from	one	host,	which	is	often	stronger	than	the	string	itself.
Encrypted-session	malware
Model	over	TLS	metadata:	JA3	rarity	against	the	learned	baseline,	absence	of	SNI,	certificate
validity	window,	self-signed	status,	and	the	packet-size	and	inter-arrival	sequence	of	the	first
several	packets.	Never	any	payload.
Branch	C	—	anomaly	detection
Unsupervised	scoring	against	per-host	baselines,	for	behaviour	you	cannot	enumerate	in	advance.
Detector
Approach
Data	exfiltration
Outbound	volume	against	the	host's	own	learned	baseline,	outbound-to-inbound	ratio,	destination
novelty,	transfer	duration,	time-of-day	deviation.
C2	beaconing
Regularity	of	the	inter-arrival	series:	coefficient	of	variation,	autocorrelation,	spectral	peak.	Must
tolerate	jitter,	since	real	beacons	randomise	their	interval.
THE	TWO	THAT	WILL	BE	ATTACKED	IN	QUESTIONING
Exfiltration	and	beaconing	are	where	false	positives	live.	Legitimate	backups	and	video	calls	look	exactly	like	exfiltration	on	a
byte-ratio	anomaly.	Time	synchronisation,	package	update	checks	and	monitoring	heartbeats	are	perfectly	periodic	and
entirely	innocent.	If	your	benign	traffic	does	not	contain	these	confounders,	your	numbers	are	meaningless	and	a
knowledgeable	judge	will	say	so.	Plant	them	deliberately	—	see	section	3.
DONE	WHEN
All	eight	detectors	run	against	a	replayed	capture	and	produce	findings	with	populated	evidence.	Each	is	independently	unit-
tested	against	fixture	features	with	known	expected	outputs.
LAYER	5
Fusion
Purpose
Convert	incomparable	raw	findings	into	calibrated,	deduplicated,	correlated	alerts.	This	layer	is	what	makes	the	output
usable,	and	it	is	what	most	competing	teams	will	not	have.
What	to	build
Calibration.
	Map	each	detector's	raw	score	onto	a	common	probability	scale	by	fitting	against	your	labelled	validation
set.	A	confidence	of	0.8	must	mean	the	same	thing	whichever	detector	produced	it,	otherwise	the	number	on	the
dashboard	is	decorative.
Severity	assignment.
	Severity	is	not	confidence.	It	combines	confidence	with	the	inherent	seriousness	of	the	threat
class	and,	if	you	model	it,	the	importance	of	the	asset	involved.	A	low-confidence	exfiltration	finding	on	a	critical	host
may	outrank	a	high-confidence	scan	on	a	spare	machine.
Deduplication.
	Suppress	repeat	findings	for	the	same	entity,	threat	class	and	evidence	pattern	within	a	time	window.
Emit	one	alert	with	an	occurrence	count	rather	than	sixty	identical	alerts.
Correlation.
	Group	related	alerts	on	the	same	host	within	a	time	window	into	a	single	incident,	and	order	them	into	a
kill-chain	narrative:	reconnaissance,	then	command	and	control,	then	exfiltration.	This	is	the	highest-value	component
in	the	entire	build	relative	to	its	cost.
DONE	WHEN
A	one-hour	replay	containing	a	persistent	beacon	produces	one	incident	with	an	occurrence	count,	not	sixty	alerts.
Confidence	scores	from	different	detectors	are	demonstrably	comparable	against	held-out	labelled	data.
LAYER	6
Alert	bus	and	persistence
Purpose
--- page 7 ---
Deliver	alerts	to	the	screen	immediately	and	to	storage	durably,	without	either	path	blocking	the	other.
What	to	build
A	publisher	that	fans	each	alert	out	to	two	independent	consumers.	One	pushes	over	a	WebSocket	to	connected
dashboards.	The	other	writes	to	PostgreSQL.	The	live	path	must	never	wait	on	the	durable	path.
Schema:	an	
alerts
	table	with	the	evidence	array	stored	as	JSONB,	an	
incidents
	table,	and	a	join	between	them.	Index
on	timestamp,	source	IP,	and	threat	class	—	those	are	the	three	things	every	query	filters	on.
Decisions	to	freeze	now
Batch	the	database	writes.	One	insert	per	alert	will	become	your	bottleneck	during	a	flood,	which	is	precisely	when
you	least	want	a	bottleneck.
Stamp	every	alert	with	the	timestamp	of	the	packet	that	triggered	it	and	the	timestamp	of	alert	emission.	The
difference	is	your	detection	latency,	and	you	are	required	to	report	it.
The	API	is	read-only	over	historical	data.	Nothing	in	this	system	ever	writes	back	toward	the	network.
DONE	WHEN
Alerts	appear	on	a	connected	WebSocket	client	within	a	bounded,	measured	delay	of	the	triggering	packet,	and	are
simultaneously	queryable	from	PostgreSQL	by	time	range,	host	and	threat	class.
LAYER	7
Dashboard
Purpose
This	is	what	the	judges	actually	see.	Every	other	layer	is	evaluated	through	this	one.
What	to	build
Live	alert	feed
	—	streaming	in	via	WebSocket,	filterable	by	threat	class,	severity	and	host.
Evidence	drill-down
	—	click	any	alert,	see	the	exact	features	and	values	that	triggered	it	against	their	thresholds.
This	directly	answers	the	"supporting	evidence"	requirement	and	is	the	most	convincing	thing	on	the	screen.
Incident	view
	—	correlated	alerts	on	one	host	shown	as	an	ordered	narrative.
Throughput	panel
	—	live	flows	per	second,	packets	per	second,	and	megabits	per	second	sustained.	Requirement
(d)	asks	you	to	demonstrate	this,	not	assert	it.
Latency	panel
	—	distribution	of	packet-to-alert	delay,	showing	median	and	tail.
Host	timeline
	—	one	machine's	activity	over	time,	which	is	how	an	analyst	actually	investigates.
BUILD	THIS	AGAINST	FIXTURES	FROM	DAY	ONE
The	dashboard	developer	should	never	be	blocked.	Layer	0	fixtures	let	the	entire	interface	be	built	and	polished	while	the
pipeline	is	still	being	written.	Swapping	the	fixture	source	for	the	real	WebSocket	at	the	end	is	a	one-line	change.
DONE	WHEN
A	live	replay	drives	the	full	dashboard,	and	any	alert	can	be	drilled	into	for	its	evidence	within	two	clicks.
LAYER	8
AI	analyst
Purpose
Differentiation,	not	detection.	Strictly	downstream,	strictly	optional	to	the	core	requirements.
What	to	build
Plain-language	explanation	of	any	alert,	generated	from	its	evidence	fields.
Incident	narration	—	turn	a	correlated	group	into	a	short	account	of	what	appears	to	have	happened.
Natural-language	query	over	the	persisted	alert	store:	"show	me	every	host	that	beaconed	in	the	last	hour".
Suggested	analyst	next	steps,	framed	as	observations	rather	than	instructions.
Hard	boundaries
Reads	only	from	the	alert	database.	Never	from	raw	traffic,	never	from	payload.
Cannot	influence	detection,	scoring	or	severity.
--- page 8 ---
Every	generated	statement	traces	back	to	specific	evidence	fields.	An	analyst	layer	that	speculates	beyond	its
evidence	is	worse	than	no	analyst	layer.
The	system	passes	every	problem-statement	requirement	with	this	layer	switched	off.	Demonstrate	that	if	asked.
DONE	WHEN
Any	alert	or	incident	can	be	explained	in	plain	language,	with	every	claim	traceable	to	a	stored	evidence	field,	and	the	whole
layer	can	be	disabled	without	affecting	anything	upstream.
LAYER	9
Evaluation	and	benchmark	harness
Purpose
Turn	claims	into	measurements.	This	layer	is	a	graded	deliverable	disguised	as	internal	tooling.
What	to	build
Accuracy	harness.
	Replay	a	labelled	capture,	join	emitted	alerts	against	ground	truth,	and	report	precision,	recall	and
F1	
per	threat	class
.	Report	false	positives	per	hour	on	purely	benign	traffic	as	a	headline	number.
DO	NOT	REPORT	ACCURACY
With	rare	attack	classes,	overall	accuracy	is	a	meaningless	figure	—	a	detector	that	fires	on	nothing	scores	extremely	well.
Any	judge	who	knows	the	domain	will	notice	immediately.	Report	precision	and	recall	per	class,	and	be	ready	to	explain	the
trade-off	you	chose.
Throughput	harness.
	Replay	at	increasing	rates	until	the	pipeline	saturates.	Record	sustained	flows	per	second,
megabits	per	second,	per-layer	CPU	and	memory,	and	the	latency	distribution	at	each	rate.	The	output	is	one	chart	and
one	sentence:	
"sustained	X	flows	per	second	with	95th-percentile	alert	latency	under	Y	milliseconds."
	That	sentence	is
what	requirement	(d)	is	asking	for.
Constraint	proof.
	A	demonstration	that	runs	the	entire	system	with	outbound	network	access	blocked,	showing	it	still
detects	normally.	Thirty	seconds	of	demo	for	the	one	architectural	constraint	every	other	team	will	treat	as	decorative.
DONE	WHEN
A	single	command	produces	the	full	evaluation	report,	and	the	throughput	figure	is	a	number	you	measured	rather	than	one
you	estimated.
--- page 9 ---
3.	Parallel	workstream:	traffic	generation
The	problem	statement	provides	no	dataset	link.	What	it	provides	is	a	recipe.	This	means	building	the	data	is	a
workstream	in	its	own	right,	and	it	starts	on	day	one	and	runs	alongside	everything	above.
The	upside	is	real:	traffic	you	generate	yourself	carries	perfect	ground-truth	labels,	because	you	know	exactly	which
container	sent	which	packet	at	which	second.
3.1		The	gap	in	the	named	tools
Threat	class
Coverage	from	the	named	tools
Volumetric	DDoS
Covered	by	the	named	flood	and	slow-exhaustion	tools
Amplification
Needs	a	reflector	service	standing	in	the	lab
DNS	tunnelling
Covered	by	the	named	tunnelling	tools
DGA
Partially	—	published	sources	give	domain	
strings
,	not	traffic.	You	must	resolve	them
from	a	lab	host	to	produce	the	DNS	flows.
C2	beaconing
Underspecified.	Write	your	own	emulator.
Port	scanning
Not	named.	Trivial	to	add.
Data	exfiltration
Not	named.	A	scripted	bulk	upload	covers	it.
Encrypted-session	malware
Not	named.	This	is	the	real	gap.
Working	around	the	encrypted-traffic	gap	honestly.
	Have	the	beacon	emulator	connect	over	TLS	using	a	non-
browser	HTTP	client.	Scripting-language	HTTP	libraries	and	command-line	tools	each	produce	a	JA3	fingerprint
distinctly	unlike	a	mainstream	browser,	because	they	offer	different	cipher	suites	in	a	different	order.	That	is	precisely
the	real-world	signal	analysts	use,	and	it	is	fully	defensible	in	your	documentation.	Do	not	imply	you	have	malware
captures	you	do	not	have;	state	the	substitution	and	explain	why	it	is	valid.
Write	your	own	beacon	emulator.
	A	small	script	that	contacts	a	listener	every	N	seconds	with	configurable	jitter	and
payload	size	gives	you	deterministic,	parameterisable,	perfectly	labelled	traffic.	More	importantly,	it	lets	you	sweep	the
jitter	parameter	and	find	the	exact	point	where	your	detector	fails.	"Our	beacon	detector	holds	to	40%	jitter	and
degrades	beyond	that"	is	a	far	stronger	claim	than	"we	detected	the	beacon".
3.2		The	trap	that	decides	your	credibility
Load	generators	produce	bulk	streams	and	packet	floods.	Neither	resembles	real	background	traffic.	If	benign	traffic
comes	from	a	load	generator	and	malicious	traffic	comes	from	an	attack	tool,	your	models	will	hit	near-perfect	scores
within	days	—	but	they	will	have	learned	to	distinguish	
one	tool	from	another	tool
,	which	has	nothing	to	do	with
security.	Worse,	your	beacon	detector	will	report	zero	false	positives,	because	nothing	in	your	benign	set	is	legitimately
periodic.
You	will	have	never	tested	the	hard	part,	and	you	will	not	find	out	until	a	judge	asks.
Plant	confounders	deliberately:
Detector	under	test
Legitimate	traffic	that	resembles	the	threat
Beaconing
Time	synchronisation,	package	update	checks,	monitoring	agent	heartbeats,	telemetry	—	all
perfectly	periodic	and	entirely	innocent
Exfiltration
Cloud	backup,	video	call,	large	file	upload	—	all	high	outbound-to-inbound	ratio
DGA
Content-delivery	hostnames	and	cloud	storage	buckets	—	long,	random-looking,	legitimate
Scanning
Asset	inventory	or	vulnerability	sweeps	—	authorised	recon,	structurally	identical	to	hostile
recon
Source	some	of	this	by	letting	a	few	lab	containers	reach	the	real	internet:	a	headless	browser	session,	a	package
update,	a	time	daemon.	Real	traffic	beats	synthetic	traffic	for	the	benign	half	in	every	case.
This	is	your	differentiator.
	Most	teams	will	report	near-perfect	scores	on	a	clean	split.	Being	able	to	say	"our	benign
set	contains	four	legitimate	periodic	services	and	our	beacon	detector	separates	them	at	94%	precision"	puts	you	in	a
--- page 10 ---
different	conversation	entirely.
3.3		Label	by	construction
Never	label	after	the	fact.	Build	a	scenario	runner	that	orchestrates	each	attack	and	writes	a	manifest	as	it	executes:
start	time,	end	time,	source,	destination,	threat	class.	Assign	attacker	containers	to	a	reserved	address	range	so
anything	from	that	range	inside	that	window	is	unambiguous.
A	labeller	then	joins	the	manifest	against	the	connection	log	on	five-tuple	and	timestamp,	and	you	have	labelled	flows
for	free.	The	whole	thing	is	on	the	order	of	150	lines,	and	it	is	what	makes	every	number	in	your	evaluation	real.
Keep	the	manifest	in	version	control.	When	a	judge	asks	how	you	validated,	you	open	the	scenario	file.
3.4		Known	limitation,	stated	up	front
Containers	on	a	shared	bridge	have	near-zero	round-trip	time,	no	jitter,	and	related	hardware	addresses.	Some	of	your
timing	features	will	look	unnaturally	crisp	compared	to	real	network	conditions.	Let	the	benign	side	reach	the	real
internet	where	you	can,	introduce	artificial	delay	and	loss	on	the	lab	bridge,	and	document	the	limitation	in	your
writeup.	Naming	a	weakness	before	a	judge	finds	it	reads	as	rigour.
--- page 11 ---
4.	Team	allocation
Role
People
Owns
Pipeline
2
Layers	1–3.	Ingest,	Zeek	integration,	feature	store,	windowing,	memory	bounds.	The
hardest	infrastructure	work	in	the	project.
Detection
2
Layer	4	and	Layer	5.	One	person	takes	the	rule	and	statistical	detectors	plus	fusion;
the	other	takes	the	two	ML	detectors	and	calibration.
Interface
1
Layers	6–8.	Alert	bus,	API,	dashboard,	AI	analyst.	Starts	immediately	against	Layer
0	fixtures	and	is	never	blocked.
Data	and	evaluation
1
Section	3	and	Layer	9.	Traffic	generation,	labelling,	benchmark	harness,	and	the
required	documentation.
The	last	role	looks	like	the	least	glamorous	seat	on	the	team.	It	is	the	one	that	determines	whether	anything	you	build
can	be	proven	on	demo	day.	Give	it	to	someone	rigorous,	not	to	whoever	is	left	over.
5.	Build	sequence
Milestone
Target
M1
Layer	0	complete.	Schemas	frozen,	fixtures	committed,	everyone	unblocked.
M2
Thin	slice.
	One	capture	file	produces	one	port-scan	alert	on	the	dashboard,	end	to	end.	Ugly	code	and
hardcoded	thresholds	are	acceptable.	This	proves	the	pipe	exists.
M3
Traffic	generation	working.	Labelled	captures	for	all	eight	detectors,	including	planted	benign	confounders.
M4
All	four	rule	and	statistical	detectors	passing	on	labelled	data.	Feature	store	memory-bounded	and	verified.
M5
Both	ML	detectors	trained	and	evaluated.	Fusion	layer	calibrating,	deduplicating	and	correlating.
M6
Benchmark	harness	producing	throughput,	latency	and	per-class	accuracy	figures.
M7
AI	analyst	layer,	dashboard	polish,	documentation,	demo	rehearsal.
M2	is	the	milestone	that	matters	psychologically.	Once	a	single	alert	has	travelled	from	a	capture	file	to	a	screen,	the
project	stops	being	intimidating	and	becomes	a	matter	of	filling	in	boxes.
6.	Risk	register
Risk
Severity
Mitigation
Benign	traffic	too	clean;	models	learn
tool	artefacts	rather	than	threat
behaviour
Critical
Plant	confounders	per	section	3.2.	Include	real	internet	traffic	in	the
benign	set.
Feature	store	underestimated;
becomes	the	bottleneck	in	week	four
High
Give	it	a	named	owner	and	its	own	layer.	Use	probabilistic	structures
from	the	start,	not	as	a	later	optimisation.
Exfiltration	detector	generates
unusable	false-positive	volume
High
Per-host	baselining	plus	destination	novelty.	Tune	for	precision	over
recall	and	say	so	explicitly.
AI	analyst	absorbs	time	the	detectors
needed
Medium
Hard-gate	it	behind	M6.	The	system	must	fully	pass	the	problem
statement	without	it.
No	throughput	figure	by	demo	day
Medium
Rate	control	built	into	Layer	1	on	day	one,	not	retrofitted	at	the	end.
Architecture	churn
Medium
Layer	0	schemas	are	frozen.	Changes	require	the	whole	team	to	agree,
not	one	person	to	decide.
7.	Demo-day	checklist
--- page 12 ---
Six	things	must	be	ready	to	show,	in	this	order	of	importance:
1.	
Live	detection.
	Replay	running,	alerts	appearing	on	the	dashboard	in	real	time.
2.	
Evidence	drill-down.
	Click	an	alert,	show	exactly	which	features	and	values	triggered	it.	This	answers	the
requirement	most	teams	gesture	at.
3.	
An	incident,	not	an	alert	list.
	One	host,	correlated	activity,	ordered	into	a	narrative.
4.	
The	throughput	number.
	Live	gauge	plus	a	sentence:	sustained	rate	and	tail	latency,	both	measured.
5.	
Per-class	precision	and	recall
	against	labelled	data,	with	an	honest	statement	of	where	the	system	is	weakest.
6.	
The	read-only	proof.
	System	running	with	outbound	access	blocked,	still	detecting.	Thirty	seconds,	and	almost
nobody	else	will	do	it.
Have	an	answer	prepared	for	each	of	these:	how	you	controlled	false	positives,	why	you	chose	statistical	methods	where
you	did,	what	your	benign	baseline	contains,	where	the	system	fails,	and	whether	the	AI	layer	has	network	access.